46

the bottom layer of the profile is equal to FLUX(L). For convenience, this
value is converted to mm and set equal to DRAIN. DRAIN then represents
the total outflow from the lowest layer of the soil profile and is an available
output variable for those interested in the time course of drainage out of the
soil profile.

Evapotranspiration and upward flow

The soil water balance subroutine requires calculations for potential evapora-
tion from the soil and plant surfaces. The equations to predict evaporation are
primarily those described in Ritchie (1972). The main difference between this
part of the soil water balance subroutine and the Ritchie model is that a
Priestley-Taylor (1972) equation for potential evapotranspiration is used
instead of the Penman equation. This was done to eliminate the need for vapor
pressure and wind inputs while providing sufficiently accurate evapotranspira-
tion information.

Calculation of potential evaporation with a modified Priestley-Taylor equa-
tion requires an approximation of daytime temperature (TD) and the soil-plant
reflection coefficient (ALBEDO) for solar radiation. For the approximation of
the daytime temperature a weighted mean of the daily maximum (TEMPMX)
and minimum (TEMPMN) air temperatures is used

(TD =0.6 x TEMPMX + 0.4 x TEMPMN )

The combined crop and soil albedo (ALBEDO) is calculated from the model
estimate of leaf area index (LAI) and the input bare soil albedo (SALB). Prior
to germination, ALBEDO is equal to SALB. For pre-anthesis conditions the
value for ALBEDO is

(41BEDo = 0.23 — (0.23 — SALB) x exp(—0.75 x LAI) )

For post-anthesis, the ALBEDO is calculated, assuming that the maturing
canopy results in an increased albedo,

ALBEDO = 0.23 + (LAI —4) x 2/160

An equilibrium evaporation rate (EEQ) defined in Priestley and Taylor (1972)
is calculated from ALBEDO, TD, and the input solar radiation SOLRAD. The
equation was developed in a simplified mathematical form, but gives quite
similar results to the more formal equation in which long wave radiation
calculations are made separately. The EEQ calculation also estimates daytime
net radiation instead of 24-hour net radiation.

EEQ = SOLRAD x (4.88 x 1073 — 4.37 x 1073 x ALBEDO)
x (TD + 29)
The units of EEQ is mm day~! and SOLRAD is MJ m~? day~?. A graphical

 

 

 

 

 

 

